# Week 1, Day 4


## Housekeeping

***[assignments]***





## Arrays

Create a new folder:

```sh
# folder description goes here
```

## Array basics

To review: what is an array?
- A list of items
- Can be multiple datatypes, but usually they won't be
- We write arrays with square brackets and commas

An example of an array with multiple datatypes:

```js
let values = ['Tony', undefined, 23, true, ['Ryan', 400.2]];
```

Notice that the last value in the `values` array is another array!
We can put values of any type in arrays, and arrays are just another type.

An example of an array of strings:

```js
let students = ['Amira', 'Marshall', 'Rhys', 'Ray', 'Iesha'];
```

Why do we care if the values are all of the same type?
- Often times with an array we will use a loop (or array method) to do something with each element.
- If the values are all of the same type, it is easier to do this.
- For example, we could write a loop to make every element of the array all-caps, which only makes sense for strings


## Retrieval

How do we get values out of an array?
- We use *square brackets* and *indices*.
- To get the third value out of an array called `bananas`, we can write `bananas[2]`.
- Why 2 and not 3?
  - Array indexing starts at 0 in JavaScript (as in most programming languages).

Using the same `students` array, we can assign the string `'Ray'` to a variable like so:

```js
let ray = students[3];
```

What about if we have an array within an array?
- In this case, we can use multiple square brackets after each other.
- To get `'Ryan'` out of the `values` array from above:
```js
let ryan = values[4][0];
```
- The way to read this is from left to right:
  - We start with `values`
  - We get the fifth element from `values`
  - Then we get the first element from *that* array




### Challenge: array retrieval

***[link to array retrieval challenge]***




## Populating and referring: basic methods

Consider the following array.

```js
let food = ['pecan pie', 'shrimp', 'quesadilla', 'cheesecake', 'hot dog'];
```

We have seen that we can use a loop to go through the elements of an array.
- A `for ... in` loop goes through the indices
  - But as we have just seen, we can use square brackets to get the value if we need it
- A `for ... of` loop goes through the values themselves

```js
for (let i in food) {
  console.log(food[i]);
}

for (let f of food) {
  console.log(f);
}
```