# Week 1, Day 4


## Housekeeping

***[assignments]***





## Arrays

Create a new folder:

```sh
# folder description goes here
```

### Array basics

To review: what is an array?
- A list of items
- Can be multiple datatypes, but usually they won't be
- We write arrays with square brackets and commas

An example of an array with multiple datatypes:

```js
let values = ['Tony', undefined, 23, true, ['Ryan', 400.2]];
```

Notice that the last value in the `values` array is another array!
We can put values of any type in arrays, and arrays are just another type.

An example of an array of strings:

```js
let students = ['Amira', 'Marshall', 'Rhys', 'Ray', 'Iesha'];
```

Why do we care if the values are all of the same type?
- Often times with an array we will use a loop (or array method) to do something with each element.
- If the values are all of the same type, it is easier to do this.
- For example, we could write a loop to make every element of the array all-caps, which only makes sense for strings


### Retrieval

How do we get values out of an array?
- We use *square brackets* and *indices*.
- To get the third value out of an array called `bananas`, we can write `bananas[2]`.
- Why 2 and not 3?
  - Array indexing starts at 0 in JavaScript (as in most programming languages).

Using the same `students` array, we can assign the string `'Ray'` to a variable like so:

```js
let ray = students[3];
```

What about if we have an array within an array?
- In this case, we can use multiple square brackets after each other.
- To get `'Ryan'` out of the `values` array from above:
```js
let ryan = values[4][0];
```
- The way to read this is from left to right:
  - We start with `values`
  - We get the fifth element (index 4) from `values`
  - Then we get the first element (index 0) from *that* array




#### Challenge: array retrieval

***[link to array retrieval challenge]***




### Populating and referring

#### Loops revisited

Consider the following array.

```js
let food = ['pecan pie', 'shrimp', 'quesadilla', 'cheesecake', 'hot dog'];
```

We have seen that we can use a loop to go through the elements of an array.
- A `for ... in` loop goes through the indices
  - But as we have just seen, we can use square brackets to get the value if we need it
- A `for ... of` loop goes through the values themselves

The following two loops do the same thing, in other words.
```js
for (let i in food) {
  console.log(food[i]);
}

for (let f of food) {
  console.log(f);
}
```

#### Basic methods

We have several ways to add things or remove things from arrays. (These are *methods*, which are just functions that are attached to values; more on this later.)

<dl>
  <dt><code>.push</code></dt><dd><em>appends</em> elements to the end of the array</dd>
  <dt><code>.splice</code></dt><dd><em>splices</em> elements before elements and can remove elements as well</dd>
  <dt><code>.pop</code></dt><dd>removes elements from the end of the array</dd>
</dl>

`.push` and `.pop` are straightforward.
- `.pop` does not take an arguments because it just removes something.
- `.push` takes one argument: the thing to push onto the end of the array.
- To use them, we can use a dot and then the name of the method after either an array literal or, more typically, a variable storing an array.

This code below removes `'hot dog'` and adds `'pizza'` to the end of the `food` array.

```js
food.pop();          // returns 'hot dog'
food.push('pizza');  // returns 5
console.log(food);   // [ 'pecan pie', 'shrimp', 'quesadilla', 'cheesecake', 'pizza' ]
```

***Optional note:***
- Remember we said functions *return* things?
- Functions can do things before they return a value
  - For example, `.push` pushes an element onto the end of an array *and then* returns a value
- `.pop` returns the element you popped off
- `.push` returns the length of the array after the push


`.splice` is a little trickier.
- It takes *at least* two arguments:
  - The first is the position to start at in the list (remember: zero-indexed!)
  - The second is how many things to remove before we start inserting
  - Any remaining arguments are inserted into the array at that position

```js
food.splice(1, 1, 'bananas', 'plantains');  // returns ['shrimp']
food.splice(2, 0, 'sweet potato pie');      // returns []
```

- The first example here starts at the 1 position, removes one item, and inserts the strings `'bananas'` and `'plantains'` into the array at that same position.
- The second example starts at position 2, doesn't remove anything, and adds `'sweet potato pie'`.
  - This is how to add elements in the middle of the array.

***Optional note:*** `.splice` returns an array consisting of all the things you removed. If you removed nothing, it returns an empty array.


#### Challenge: array splicing

***[link to array splicing challenge (unwritten currently)]***



### Iterating


Again, here's the original `food` array:

```js
let food = ['pecan pie', 'shrimp', 'quesadilla', 'cheesecake', 'hot dog'];
```

We have another method that allows us to go through elements of an array one by one.
- This is `.forEach`
- It is an alternative to using a loop
- It takes a *function* as an argument, and applies that function to each element
  - Arrow functions are perfect for this; we can write them as needed

```js
food.forEach(f => { console.log(f); });

food.forEach((food, number) => {
  console.log(number);
  console.log(food);
}); 
```

Note:
- Remember we said that if we use a block body for an arrow function we have to use the `return` keyword if we want to return anything?
- Here we're not doing that because we actually *don't care* about returning a value, we just want to do some `console.log`ging.


#### Challenge: movie array manipulation

***[link to movie array manipulation challenge]***


### More array methods and properties

#### `.length`

How do we get the length of an array?
All we have to do is ask its `.length`.

```js
let digits = [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9];

console.log(digits.length);  // 10
```

Notice we're not using parentheses after `.length` because it is a *property*.
- A property is a *value* attached to an object
- A method is a *function* attached to an object
- We access both with dot notation (more on this in a minute)


#### `.toString`

Arrays (and objects in JavaScript generally) have a `.toString` method which returns a representation of the values of the array as a string.

```js
console.log(digits.toString());         // 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9

console.log(['a','b','c'].toString());  // a,b,c
```

Notice that we can call methods on array literals directly, not just on variables containing arrays.



#### Challenge: reversing an array

***[link to array reversal challenge]***




## Objects



Remember objects?
- Objects store *keys*, and each key has a *value*.
- Whereas with arrays we usually want all the values to be the same type, with objects the values will often be different types.
- Here is an object we can play with that illustrates this:

```js
let venomoth = {
  species: 'Venomoth',
  number: 49,
  types: ['bug', 'poison'],
  baseStats: { HP: 70, attack: 65, defense: 60, spAttack: 90, spDefense: 75, speed: 90 },
  moves: [
    { name: 'tackle', power: 40, accuracy: 100 },
    { name: 'confusion', power: 50, accuracy: 100 },
    { name: 'sleep powder', power: undefined , accuracy: 75 },
    { name: 'psychic', power: 90 , accuracy: 100 }
  ]
};
```

### Dot notation

How do we access information within objects?
- Remember with arrays that we used square brackets to access members of the array by index.
- With objects, we will use *dot notation* to access values in the array by key.
- This looks like this: `objectName.keyName`

What happens if we have an object in an object, as with `venomoth.baseStats`?
- Then we can chain dot notation in the same way as we chained square brackets
- So, to get `60` we can use `venomoth.baseStats.defense`
- Again, the way to read this is from right to left:
  - Start at `venomoth`
  - Go into `baseStats`
  - Then go into `defense`
  - Then get the value associated with that key

We can mix dot and square bracket notations if we have arrays in objects or objects in arrays!
- `venomoth.moves` is an array, so we can use square brackets to get the first thing out of it
- `venomoth.moves[0]` is an *object*, so we use dot notation to get `name` out of *it*
- We end up with `venomoth.moves[0].name`, which is a string


Lastly, it is important to know that we can *set* properties and methods of objects as well using dot notation and an assignment operator, usually `=`, just like we set variables.
Here we take an empty object and put a few key-value pairs in it, then we *reassign* one:

```js
let emptyObj = {};

emptyObj.x = 3;
emptyObj.cactus = true;
emptyObj.x = 7;

console.log(emptyObj);  // { x: 7, cactus: true }
```

### Terminology

Note: we have used "property" and "key" similarly.

***Tentative explanation:*** You can think of a property as a key-value pair together: it is the key and the value that key has in the object. We would say "the `x` property of `emptyObj`" to mean *either* the key `x` or the value `7`. Usually there is no confusion, though. When we say "set the `x` property to `7`", we mean set the key `x` to the value `7`.

We have mentioned this before but to say it again: if the value of a property is a function, we call that function a *method* of the object. For example:

```js
let methodExample = {
  prop: 3,
  func: () => console.log('myFunction is a method')
};

funcObj.func();  // myFunction is a method
```




### Challenge: Digging into objects: Superstore

***[link to superstore challenge]***







### `Object` methods

Here's a fun object:

```js
let spaceJam = {
  tuneSquad: {
    human: 'Michael Jordan',
    rabbit1: 'Bugs Bunny',
    rabbit2: 'Lola Bunny',
    duck: 'Daffy Duck',
    tDevil: 'Tasmanian Devil',
    bird: 'Tweety',
    cat: 'Sylvester',
    pig: 'Porky Pig'
  },
  monstars: {
    purple: 'Bupkus',
    green: 'Bang',
    red: 'Nawt',
    orange: 'Pound',
    blue: 'Blanko'
  },
  nbaPlayers: {
    phoenixSuns: 'Charles Barkley',
    newJerseyNets: 'Shawn Bradley',
    newYorkKnicks: 'Patrick Ewing',
    charlotteHornets1: 'Larry Johnson',
    charlotteHornets2: 'Muggsy Bogues'
  }
};
```

How can we get the *keys* from this object?
- One way is by using a `for ... in` loop, as we have seen
- Another way is by using a function called `Object.keys`
  - This is a method of capital-'O' `Object`, the mother of all JavaScript objects
- We want `Object.keys` to give us a list of all the keys in an object, so what type does it return?
  - an array!

```js
let sjKeys = Object.keys(spaceJam);
console.log(sjKeys);      // [ 'toonSquad', 'monstars', 'nbaPlayers' ]

sjKeys instanceof Array;  // true
```

If instead we want the values, we can use the corresponding `Object.values` method.

```js
console.log(Object.values(spaceJam.monstars));  // [ 'Bupkus', 'Bang', 'Nawt', 'Pound', 'Blanko' ]
```

Finally, because `Object.keys` and `Object.values` arrays, we can use properties and methods for arrays that we have seen.

```js
Object.keys(spaceJam.tuneSquad).forEach(t => {
  console.log(t.toUpperCase);
});

console.log(Object.keys(spaceJam).length === Object.values(spaceJam).length);
```

This last line will actually print true for any object. Can you see why?



### Square bracket notation for objects

When we use dot notation, we are asking for a value of some key from an object.

But consider the following situation.
- What if we have a variable `myKey` which holds a string that is the name of some key of object `obj`
- If we write `obj.myKey`, we are asking for the value associated with the key `myKey`
  - But, `myKey` is not a key, it is a variable that *holds* the key
  - So, this won't work
- Instead, we have to use *square bracket notation* to use the *value* of `myKey`
- Try to make sense of this:

```js
let garden = {
  vegetable: 'zucchini',
  flower: 'sunflower',
  fruit: 'grape',
  water: true,
  sun: true,
  size: 10
};

let x = 'vegetable';

console.log(garden.vegetable);     // zucchini
console.log(garden.x);             // undefined
console.log(garden['vegetable']);  // zucchini
console.log(garden[x]);            // zucchini
```

What's going on here?
- The first `console.log`: we print out the value of the `vegetable` property of the `garden` object.
- The second: we look for a property *literally called `x`* in `garden`, but we don't find it, so the result is `undefined`.
- The third: we use a string inside square brackets to ask for the `vegetable` property.
- The fourth: we use an expression inside square brackets (the variable `x`), which evaluates to the string `'vegetable'`, which means we look up the `vegetable` property of `garden`, which is `'zucchini'`.


Just like with dot notation, we can also *set* properties with square brackets in addition to retrieving them.

```js
let baking = {};

baking['zucchini'] = 'time to make some bread'

console.log(baking.zucchini);     // time to make some bread
console.log(baking['zucchini']);  // time to make some bread
```


## Git with GitHub

What have we already learned with git?
- `git init`
- `git status`
- `git add .`
- `git commit -m [message]`


Now we're going to actually "push" our code for the static site to the internet, specifically GitHub.
Why do we care about this?
- Our code is available from anywhere
- If our computer crashes, we have another copy
- Other people can see our code
- Eventually, we will be collaborating using GitHub

It is ok if this is not the final version of the code.


We're going to use something called GitHub pages. This is a way to host a website directly from a git repository.

1. Make sure you have the most recent version of your code committed.
    1. Also make sure you have `index.html` as your main HTML file
2. Go to GitHub and create a new repository.
3. After you create the repository, look for the two lines of code under "...or push an existing repository from the command line". Copy these and run these in your git repo folder.
    1. `git remote add origin [url]`
    2. `git push -u origin master`
4. Refresh the page and your code will be visible on GitHub.
5. To activate GitHub pages:
    1. Go to 'Settings' for the repository
    2. Scroll down to GitHub pages (right above the Danger Zone)
    3. Enable GitHub pages for the master branch
    4. Your site is now available at the given URL
    5. If the site does not appear:
        1. Wait a few minutes
        2. Make sure you have an `index.html`
6. To make changes:
    1. Add the files to the staging area and commit the changes locally
    2. Then run `git push origin master`
    3. It may take a few minutes for the changes to appear








## Recap

- Arrays
  - retrieval using square brackets
  - array methods and properties
    - `.push`, `.pop`, and `.splice`
    - `.forEach`
    - `.length`
    - `.toString`
    - `.reverse` (challenge)
- Objects
  - dot notation
  - square bracket notation
  - properties and methods
  - `Object.keys` and `Object.values`
- Git and GitHub



### Assignments

