# Week 1, Day 2

Welcome back!

## Assignments

### CSS creatures

Make sure these are submitted!

Any volunteers to walk us through their creature?


### Assignment 2: Static Site

Due Monday (week 2, day 1).

[assignment description goes here]




## Git

Git is a *version control system* for code. Advantages of version control and git especially:
- We have a record of all the changes made to the code and at what point they were made
- Sometimes the code we are working on breaks and we need to revert to the last working version
  - These checkpoints in git are called *commits*
- Eventually, we will work with multiple *branches* so different people can be working on different features at the same time. We can then *merge* these changes together into the master branch
- git is widely used in the industry to maintain small personal projects as well as enormous code bases


The git workflow has three stages: working, staging, and committing.
1. You edit files and save them.
2. You *stage* the files, essentially saying, these are ready to be committed as changes to the repository.
3. You *commit* all the changes in the staging area, rendering the working area clean.


The basic commands for working with git are:
- `git init` to initialize a new repository
- `git status` to see the status of the current git repo
- `git add .` to add all files in the current directory to the staging area
- `git commit -m "[message]"` to commit files you've added

We will be seeing how to *push* changes to an external service in a couple days.


Note: when you start working with git, especially on Windows, it may ask you to specify your name and email so it knows whose info to attach to each commit.



## JavaScript

### A note about semicolons

JavaScript does not *require* semicolons...
- ...but they can make some code easier to understand.
- They are *not* required after code blocks of conditionals or function declarations.
- JS is pretty smart with how it detects ends of statements.


### Scope

Create a new file in `1-grammarAndTypes`:

```
1-grammarAndTypes
  └─ 03-scope.js
```

#### What is scope?

JavaScript has both *local* and *global* scope.
- Think of Indianapolis vs. the rest of the world
- When you are in Indy, you are still in the world, but not necessarily vice versa

```js
var x = 12;

function scope() {
  var x = 33;
  console.log(x);
}

scope();         // 33
console.log(x);  // 12
```

Which value shows? Compare the above to the following, where all we change is dropping the keyword `var`.

```js
var x = 12;

function scope() {
  x = 33  // 
  console.log(x);
}

scope();         // 33
console.log(x);  // 33
```

Why did this happen?
- When you have the keyword `var` inside `scope()`, you are declaring a completely new variable; it just happens to have the same name as `x`.
- However, when you remove `var`, you are no longer declaring another `x` variable, but you are giving the existing variable a new value.
- Therefore, after that point, `x` no longer equals 12, but 33.

#### `var` vs. `let`

Since ES6, we now have three keywords to declare variables: `var`, `let`, and `const`.
- `const` is straightforward: variables declared with `const` cannot be re-expressed.
- But `var` and `let` seem to be the same, right?
- Consider the below:

```js
function varTest() {
  var x = 33;
  if (true) {
    var x = 45;
    console.log(x);
  }
  console.log(x);
}

varTest();       // 45, 45
console.log(x);  // 12
```
But, with `let`, the behavior is somewhat different, and maybe more what you would expect:

```js
var x = 12;

function letTest() {
  var x = 33;
  if (true) {
    let x = 45;
    console.log(x);
  }
  console.log(x);
}

letTest();       // 45, 33
console.log(x);  //12
```

This is a question of **block scope**.  
- A *block*, simply put, is the part between `{` and `}` in a function or conditional; inside a block is local scope.
- `var` does **not** have block scope built in.  It is not locked into only operating within those curly brackets, and can therefore bleed into a parent scope.
- Notice, here, we are nested within two blocks: `varTest` or `letTest` and the `if` statement.  If `var` is run, it can bleed from the `if` block into the `varTest` block.  In effect, we cannot be too sure where `var` has access---elusive!
- `let` *does* have block scope.  It is locked into which block it is located and cannot escape from those curly brackets.  This is particularly helpful when you want to run the variable only in that particular block without the danger of having it affect any other code.

Let's check `const`.

```js
function constTest() {
  const scope = 1;
  if (true) {
    const scope = 2;
    console.log(scope);  // 2
  }
  console.log(scope);    // 1
}

constTest();
```

We see from this that `const` does have block scope as well.

Note: you have now seen the two ways curly boys are used in JavaScript, objects and code blocks. It might take you awhile to get used to using them in both ways, but JavaScript will (almost) always know whether you are writing an object or a code block.


### Hoisting

Create a new file:

```
1-grammarAndTypes
  └─ 04-hoisting.js
```

Consider the following:

```js
console.log(scissors);  // undefined

scissors = 'blue';

console.log(scissors);  // blue

var scissors;
```

Notice:
- At the first `console.log`, `scissors` has not been initialized, so its value is `undefined` (we saw yesterday that all variables that are declared but not initialized have this value)
- However, we don't get a reference error (which would happen if we hadn't declared the variable at all) even though the declaration is on a *later* line! What's going on? It seems like JavaScript knows that `scissors` is declared before it actually reads the declaration.
- This is what is known as *hoisting*: the declarations of variables (and definitions of functions) are all read first, in effect "hoisting" them to the top of the file.
- What is happening is that JavaScript reads through your code twice, the first, it simply reads through, looking for the *left-hand side* of variables and functions: the declarations. Then, the second pass through, it reads the *right-hand side*, assigning values and expressions.



### Literals

Create a new file:

```
1-grammarAndTypes
  └─ 06-literals.js
```

From the MDN docs:
> Literals represent values in JavaScript. These are fixed values---not variables---that you *literally* provide in your script.

We have already seen examples of literals:
- Number literals are just numbers: `10.8`
- String literals are sequences of characters in single or double quotes: `"a fat cat"`
- A Boolean literal is either `true` or `false`

We saw an example of an array literal yesterday, which is written with square brackets and commas between elements.

```js
let weekdays = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday'];
console.log(weekdays.toString());  // Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday
```

Lastly, an *object literal* uses curly braces, colons to separate keys from values, and commas to separate key-value pairs from each other:

```js
let soups = {
  a: 'chicken noodle',
  b: 'tomato',
  c: 'beef and barley'
};
console.log(soups);  // { a: 'chicken noodle', b: 'tomato', c: 'beef and barley' }
```


### Operators

#### Assignment operators

Create a new folder in `javascriptLibrary` called `5-expressionsAndOperators`, and a new file in it called `01-assignmentOperators.js`:

```
javascriptMay2020 (or whatever)
  └┬ javascriptLibrary
   └┬ 1-jsFundamentals
    └┬ 5-expressionsAndOperators
     └─ 01-assignmentOperators.js
```

JavaScript has several ways of assigning values to variables. By far the most common is `=`, which simply sets the variable on the left to the value on the right.

Let's declare a variable:

```js
let x;
```

Now let's initialize it with the normal `=` assignment operator:

```js
x = 5;
```

(As we have seen, we can do this on one line as `let x = 5;`.)

Here are a few more operators that take into account the current value of `x` when setting its new value. Here we are using the number 1 for the right hand side, but this could be different.

Operator name            | Syntax      | Equivalent syntax
------------------------ | ----------- | -----------------
Addition                 | `x += 1;`   | `x = x + 1;`
Subtraction              | `x -= 1;`   | `x = x - 1;`
Multiplication           | `x *= 1;`   | `x = x * 1;`
Division                 | `x /= 1;`   | `x = x / 1;`
Remainder (or *modulus*) | `x %= 1;`   | `x = x % 1;`
Exponentiation           | `x **= 1;`  | `x = x ** 1;`




#### Comparison operators

Create a new file:

```
5-expressionsAndOperators
  └─ 02-comparisonOperators.js
```

These operators are used for *comparison*.

***[more here?]***


Operator name            | Syntax     | Semantics (exactly when is the expression true?)
------------------------ | ---------- | -----------------------------
Equality                 | `x == y;`  | `x` equals `y`, with possible type coercion
Strict equality          | `x === y;` | `x` equals `y`, without any type coercion
Inequality               | `x != y;`  | `x` does not equal `y` unless there is a type coercion that can make them equal
Strict inequality        | `x !== y;` | `x` does not equal `y` even if we allow type coercion
Greater than             | `x > y;`   | `x` is greater than `y`
Less than                | `x < y;`   | `x` is less than `y`
Greater than or equal to | `x >= y;`  | `x` is greater than or equal to `y` 
Less than or equal to    | `x <= y;`  | `x` is less than or equal to `y`

**Rule of thumb:** *always* use the strict (in)equality operators unless you have a very good reason not to.
This can avoid unintended problems with type coercion.

Note the difference between `=` and `==`! The first is an *assignment*, the second is a *comparison*.



There are also three Boolean operators, *and*, *or*, and *not*:

Operator name  | Syntax      | Semantics
-------------- | ----------- | ----------------
and            | `x && y;`   | true if `x` and `y` both evaluate to `true`
or             | `x \|\| y;` | true if *at least one* of `x` and `y` evaluates to `true`
not (negation) | `!x;`       | true if `x` evaluates to `false`, and vice versa


#### Truthy and falsy

By "evaluate to `true`", we mean according to JavaScript's rules.
- There are certain values that are "falsy":
  - `false`
  - `undefined`
  - `null`
  - `NaN` (the "not a number" number) (you can skip this one)
  - `0`
  - `''` (the empty string)

*All other values* are truthy.

This includes empty objects and arrays (which are falsy in some languages).

Example:

```js
if (undefined) { console.log("trying undefined"); }       // [nothing prints]

if (0) { console.log("trying 0"); }                       // [nothing prints]
if (1) { console.log("trying 1"); }                       // trying 1
if (-1 + 1) { console.log("trying some math"); }          // [nothing prints]

if ([1, 2, 3]) { console.log("trying nonempty array"); }  // trying nonempty array
if ([]) { console.log("trying empty array"); }            // trying empty array
```

Explanation:
- `undefined` and `0` are falsy, so the `console.log` is not run
- `1` is a truthy value, so the `console.log` *is* run
- Do you see how we are using expressions as the condition of the `if` block?
  - Not just `true` and `false`, but any values because they can be *converted to* `true` or `false`
- Aside: we can write an `if` block all on one line like this, because JS does not care about spacing in this context



### Conditionals


#### `if`

Create a new folder and file like so:

```
javascriptMay2020 (or whatever)
  └┬ javascriptLibrary
   └┬ 1-jsFundamentals
    └┬ 2-controlFlowAndError   # new folder
     └─ 01-if.js               # new file
```

`if` allows us to execute code only if a certain condition is met.
- An `if` consists of an expression and a single statement or, more frequently, a code block.
- When execution reaches the `if` statement, the expression is evaluated to `true` or `false` by the above rules.
- If true, the following code in the block is executed. If not, it is skipped.

```js
let isOn = true;

if (isOn == true) {
  console.log('The light is on!');
};
```

Note this is the same as 

```js
if (isOn) {
  console.log('The light is on, yay!');
};
```

Why? It is because `isOn` *is* true, so it evaluates to true. (You should never need to write `== true` in a conditional.)

Now consider:

```js
let isOff = false;

if (isOff == false) {
  console.log('The light is off, my friend!');
}
```

This is the same as

```js
if (!isOff) {
  console.log('The light is still off.')
}
```

Can you see why?

One last example, that shows that expressions using the comparison operators are evaluated as true or false.

```js
let temperature = 65;

if (temperature < 70) {
  console.log('Wear a jacket');
}
```

The expression `temp < 70` is evaluated to `true` when `temp` is 65, so the `console.log` is executed.




#### `else`

Create a new file:

```
2-controlFlowAndError
  └─ 02-ifElse.js
```

Sometimes we want to execute different code if our condition is false. For this, we can use an if-else statement.
It looks like this:

```js
if (temperature < 70) {
  console.log('Wear a jacket');
} else {
  console.log('No jacket necessary!');
}
```

This should be pretty straightforward.
- If the condition is true, the code in the first block is executed.
- If the condition is *false*, the code in the *else* block is executed.


#### Challenge

***[Capitalization challenge link]***


#### `else if`

Create a new file:

```
2-controlFlowAndError
  └─ 03-elseIf.js
```

See if you can guess what the following code does.

```js
if (temperature < 40) {
  console.log('Gonna be a cold one');
} else if (temperature > 80) {
  console.log('Heat is in store');
} else {
  console.log('A perfectly mild day');
}
```

[explanation]


#### Challenge

***[Else if challenge link]***


#### `switch`

Create a new file:

```
2-controlFlowAndError
  └─ 04-switch.js
```

As the challenge showed, we can have a long sequence of `else if`s. There is an alternative: a `switch` statement.

Here is how it works:

```js
let friend = "Ezekiel";

switch (friend) {
  case "Tom":
    console.log("Hey Tom, when are you going rock climbing?");
    break;
  case "Kenn":
    console.log("Hey Kenn, wanna play Catan?");
    break;
  case "Carolyn":
    console.log("Hey Carolyn, when are we playing DnD?");
    break;
  default:
    console.log(`I'm sorry, ${friend}, but do I know you?`); // EXPLAIN STRING INTERPOLATION
}
```

In the last `console.log`, we use something called *string interpolation* to insert a value into a string.
More on this later.

We open a `switch` with the keyword and a condition in parentheses.
- This condition will be tested against each of the `case` statements in sequence.
- Execution starts at the first `case` where the condition matches and goes until a `break`.
- We need a `break` at the end of every `case` block to prevent it from executing the next one.
- Lastly, there is a `default` case that will be executed no matter what.
- Again, to prevent the `default` block from being executed if we *do* match another statement, we need those `break`s.
- We do not need a `break` at the end of the `default` block because we are at the end of the switch.

To use `switch` with conditions we want to test for truth, we can do something like this:

```js
var someNum = -8;

switch (true) {
  case (someNum < 0 && someNum > -10): 
    console.log('between -10 and 0');
    break;
  case (someNum > 0): 
    console.log('greater than zero');
    break;
  default: 
    console.log('less than -10');
}
```




### Ternanies

Create a new file in the `5-expressionsAndOperators` folder:

```
javascriptMay2020 (or whatever)
  └┬ javascriptLibrary
   └┬ 1-jsFundamentals
    └┬ 5-expressionsAndOperators
     └─ 03-ternaries.js
```

What is a ternary?
- "binary" : 2 :: "ternary" : 3
- Most operators we have seen are binary, like `<` and `&&` (can you think of an exception? `!` is unary.)
- There is only one operator in JavaScript with *three* operands, hence "ternary"
It looks like this:

```js
let x = 6;

(x > 0) ? console.log('yes') : console.log('no');
```

This has the same effect as the if-else statement here:

```js
if (x > 0) {
  console.log('yes');
} else {
  console.log('no');
}
```

How do ternaries work?
- The expression before the `?` is evaluated
- If it is `true` (or truthy) the whole expression is evaluated to what's between the `?` and the `:`
- If it is `false` (or falsy) the whole expression is evaluated to what's after the `:`

*Editor's note: these `console.log`s we've been using have the effect here of slightly obscuring that a ternary is an **expression**, and the **value** of that expression is actually `undefined` since that's what `console.log` returns...*


A note about the "else":
- Ternaries, unlike conditionals, require the default/else catch all.
- Whereas an if/else statement can go without the else, and a switch can go without a default, ternaries need that catch all at the end; otherwise it will throw an error.
- Technical explanation: this is because a ternary is an *expression*, and expressions always need to have a value




#### Challenge

***[link to age challenge]***




## Recap

- Git
- Scope
- Hoisting
- Literals
- Assignment operators
- Comparison operators
- Conditionals
- Ternaries

***[assignments due go here]***