
# Week 1, Day 3

## Recap













## Loops

Create a new folder and file:

```
javascriptMay2020 (or whatever)
  └┬ javascriptLibrary
   └┬ 1-jsFundamentals
    └┬ 3-loops            # new folder
     └─ 01-forLoops.js    # new file
```

JavaScript has a few different kinds of loops:
- `for`
- `for ... in`
- `for ... of`
- `do ... while`
- `while`

### `for` loops

Let's start with the regular `for` loop.
- A `for












### `for ... in` loops

Create a new file:

```
3-loops
  └─ 03-forInLoops.js
```


`for ... in` loops are used to go through the keys in an object.



```js
let student = { name:"Peter", awesome: true, degree: "JavaScript", week: 1 };

for (let item in student) {
  console.log(item);  // name awesome degree week
}
```

What is going on?
- We use the same `for` keyword, but now the parentheses contain something different.
- In the parentheses, we declare a variable (here `item`) and use the `in` keyword followed by the object we want to go through
- The following block of code (surrounded by `{...}`) is executed once for each value of `item`, that is, for each key in the object
- To be explicit, we execute the `console.log` with `item` having the value of `name`, then we execute it *again* with `item` having the value of `awesome`, and so on.



To go through the *values* of an object, we need to use *square-bracket notation* (more on this later).

```js
for (let item in student) {
  console.log(student[item]);  // Peter true JavaScript 1
}
```



Can we use `for ... in` loops for arrays?
Yes, but not quite how you'd expect:

```js
let catArray = ['tabby', 'british shorthair', 'burmese', 'maine coon', 'rag doll'];

for (let cat in catArray) {
  console.log(cat);
}
```

This prints out the numbers 0 through 4 in order. Why?
- Remember, arrays are very special kinds of objects.
- A `for ... in` loop goes through the *keys* of an object.
- What are the keys of an array? Its *indices*.
- To go through the *values* of an array, we need a different loop...

#### Challenge

***[link to first name capitalization challenge]***



### `for ... of` loops

Create a new file:

```
3-loops
  └─ 03-forOfLoops.js
```


- These are used to *iterate* through the values in any *iterable*.
- An iterable is anything we can go through the values of one by one.
- The most basic example of an iterable is an array.

```js
let catArray = ['tabby', 'british shorthair', 'burmese', 'maine coon', 'rag doll'];

for (let cat of catArray) {
  console.log(cat, "says meow");
}
```

Strings are also iterable, characterwise:

```js
for (let letter of "supercalifragilisticexpialidocious") {
  console.log(letter);
}
```

**Question:** Why is each character on a separate line?  
**Answer:** We are making 34 separate calls to `console.log`, and each one starts a new line (*technically*, each one *ends* with a newline).


#### Challenge

***[link to some relevant challenge? none in source material but might be good here]***









## Functions

### What is a function?

Let's start off with the motivation.
- As programmers, we want to *factor out* complicated pieces of logic into their own units
- Also, we want to create *reusable* code, that can be run more than once
- But we also want to be able to run the same code with different inputs

A function is like a small program within a program that can be given its own input, runs, and gives us an output.

If thinking about functions from math helps you, go for it; if not, don't worry about it.

We're going to start off by showing you how to write functions in JavaScript, then we'll see how to use them.


### Declarations and expressions

Create a new folder and file:

```
javascriptMay2020 (or whatever)
  └┬ javascriptLibrary
   └┬ 1-jsFundamentals
    └┬ 4-functions                           # new folder
     └─ 01-declarationsAndExpressions.js     # new file
```

To *declare* a function:
- We start with the `function` keyword
- Then comes the name of the function
- Then a list of *parameters*/*arguments*, which can be empty, enclosed in parentheses
- Then a block of code enclosed with curly boys

Putting it all together, a simple function looks like this.

```js
function hi () {
  console.log('Hello there!');
}
```

Another way to write a function is to set it equal to a variable.
This is called a function *expression*.
Let's write a new function to do the same thing in this style.

```js
const hi2 = function () {
  console.log('Hello there again!');
}
```

A few notes on this:
- Notice the lack of a name after the `function` keyword.
- Instead, we are storing the function in the `hi2` variable.
- When writing function expressions, you usually will want to use `const` as opposed to `var` or `let`.
  - Why? Because variables that store functions will almost never change once declared
- What is the difference between function declarations and function expressions?
  - Practically, it is that declared functions are hoisted, function expressions are not.


### Calling functions

Create a new file:

```
4-functions
  └─ 02-callingFunctions.js
```

Now that we have written a function, we want to use it. This is *calling* (or *invoking*) the function.

Take the following function.
```js
function hello () {
  console.log('Hello!');
}
```

- We see this is a function named `hello`, that takes no arguments (empty parentheses), and executes one line of code, the `console.log`
- To call this function, we write its name immediately followed by parentheses: `hello()`
- The parentheses are important because otherwise we are just writing the name of the function, not telling it to execute (run its code)

```js
hello;    // [Function: hello]
hello();  // Hello!
```

What's going on?
- When we just type `hello`, the name of the function, JavaScript essentially tells us "yep, that's a function".
- But with the parentheses, we call the function, and its code is executed.
- If you run this in node, you might also see `undefined` printed after "Hello!"
  - This has to do with *returning*, which we will get to in a minute...


#### Challenge: Print the numbers

***[link to number printing challenge]***


#### Challenge: Print the array

***[link to array printing challenge]***


### Parameters

Create a new file:

```
4-functions
  └─ 03-parameters.js
```

What are parameters?
- Parameters are like empty storage boxes that we can name whatever we want.
- Parameters go in the parentheses after the function name when we are declaring a function.
- It only matters what the name is when you are using the paramter within the function: they have to match.
- You can have multiple parameters for a single function, separated by commas.
- When you call the function, you put the values for the parameters in the parentheses.

```js
function pet (animal) {
  console.log(`I have a pet ${animal}`);
}

pet('cat');     // I have a pet cat
```

This is the same as the following (will need to comment out above temporarily):

```js
function pet (pizza) {
  console.log(`I have a pet ${pizza}`);
}

pet('cat');     // I have a pet cat
```


- The name of the variable in the function definition is up to us!
- But it's best to be smart when naming things.
  - Here, `pizza` is not a good name because the variable will be receiving an animal name (hopefully)
- When we call the function, we pass in what we want `animal` to be in the parentheses (as an *argument*)
- `animal` is not defined outside of the function! It only has a value when the function is called


#### Challenge

***[link to twoParamFunction challenge]***






### `return`

Functions are like the engines of JS. They will perform a specific function and produce a desired effect.
- With the `return` keyword, we are pulling away from using `console.log` to show the output of a function in the terminal, and spitting out a value that we can then grab and place in another part of your code.
- We can effect change on your actual website with the `return` keyword, where `console.log` would only work in the dev tools (for example).
- It is like Chicken Run where the people create a huge machine that takes in chickens (like a parameter) and spits out chicken pot pies.
  - The `return` keyword is the chicken pot pie.
  - The function is doing all of the cutting, pie making, gravy filling, etc. and the return is simply giving the pie.
  - We can then take the pie and put it in something else...



```js
function captializeName(name) {
  let capName = '';
  for (let l in name) {
    if (l === 0) {
      capName += name[l].toUpperCase();
    } else {
      capName += name[l].toLowerCase();
    }
  }
   console.log(capName);
   return capName;
}

const myName = capitalizeName('tom');

console.log(myName + ', how are you doing?');  // Tom, how are you doing?
```

We can also put the call to `capitalizeName` directly in the `console.log` without storing it in a variable:

```js
console.log(capitalizeName('wilford') + " what's up");  // Wilford
```

What happens here is:
1. `console.log` starts to execute/run, and sees that it needs the value of `capitalizeName('wilford')`.
2. To get this, we execute `capitalizeName` with the argument `wilford`.
3. This function returns the string `Wilford` (with a capital 'W').
4. That value is then substituted in and `console.log` prints the whole string `Wilford what's up` to the console.

`console.log` is a function too! It takes arguments and prints them to the console, as we have seen.


#### Challenge: tip calculator

***[link to tip calculator challenge]***






### Arrow functions

Create a new file:

```
4-functions
  └─ 04-arrowFunctions.js
```

Sometimes we only want to use a function in one place and don't care about giving it a name.

"Fat arrow" functions are one way to write more concise functions.

The following two functions are the same:

```js
function coffee1 () {
  console.log('Coffee is good');
}

const coffee2 = () => {
  console.log('Coffee is good');
};
```


#### Concise vs. block bodies

An arrow function is an argument list `(...)`, and arrow `=>`, and *either*
- a block of code enclosed in curly braces, or
- an expression, which is taken to be the returned value of the function.
- The first style is called *block body*, the second is *concise body*.

The following two functions do the same thing:

```js
const addingFunc1 = (x, y) => {
  return x + y;
}

const addingFunc2 = (x, y) => x + y;
```

If we open up the braces, we have to use the `return` keyword to return something.

If we use concise body, the return is *implied*.




















## Recap

- Loops
  - `for`
  - `for ... in`
  - `for ... of`
- Functions
  - Basics
  - Returns
  - Parameters
  - Arrow functions

Now is a good time to recap Git as well.

***[review assignment status]***